RESUMABLE: Clarify client retry strategy (#3472)
httpwg/http-extensions: draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload.md

A server responding with a `413 (Content Too Large)` status code as a result of its upload limits SHOULD include the `Upload-Limit` header field in this response if possible. This might not be possible if intermediaries enforce content size restrictions. When a client receives a response with a `413 (Content Too Large)` status code during upload creation ({{upload-creation}}) or append ({{upload-appending}}), it SHOULD retry the request with a smaller size residing between `min-append-size` and `max-append-size`. If these limits are unknown at the time of receiving such a response, the client can attempt to discover them through an `OPTIONS` request. Retrying with the same request content size will likely yield the same error response. Cases where the request content size matches the `min-append-size` limit yet fails with a `413 (Content Too Large)` response might indicate a deployment mismatch that cannot be recovered from.

> ### Retry {#retry}

Reviewer: This subsection is part of section `4.1 State`. I'm not sure this is the best place as it doesn't talk about the upload resource's state directly. Maybe it can be placed after `4.6 Concurrency`.

> If the client unexpectedly received a non-successful response with the `Upload-Complete` header field value of false or missing when creating the upload resource ({{upload-creation}}) or appending to it ({{upload-appending}}), it can apply heristics described below to retry or resume the upload.

Reviewer: Small typo:

```suggestion
If the client unexpectedly received a non-successful response with the `Upload-Complete` header field value of false or missing when creating the upload resource ({{upload-creation}}) or appending to it ({{upload-appending}}), it can apply the heuristics described below to retry or resume the upload.
```

> - `409 (Conflict)` with the `Upload-Complete` header field value of false can be resumed with the correct offset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `409 (Conflict)` with the `Upload-Complete` header field value of false can be resumed with the correct offset. If no `Upload-Offset` header field is provided, it SHOULD retrieve the offset ({{offset-retrieval}})
```

Representation metadata included in the initial request (see {{Section 8.3 of HTTP}}) can affect how servers act on the uploaded representation data. The `Content-Type` header field ({{Section 8.3 of HTTP}}) indicates the media type of the representation. The `Content-Encoding` header field ({{Section 8.4 of HTTP}}) names the content codings applied to the representation. The `Content-Disposition` header field ({{CONTENT-DISPOSITION}}) can be used to transmit a filename. For this purpose, the `inline` disposition type is RECOMMENDED.

> If the client received a final response with the `Upload-Complete: ?1` header field, the upload is complete and the corresponding response comes from the resource processing the representation according to the initial request ({{upload-complete}}). Note that the status code does not necessary indicate success. `4xx (Client Error)` or `5xx (Server Error)` status codes indicate in this case an error occurred while processing the representation, therefore resuming the upload would not resolve this error.

Reviewer 2: Typo and run-on sentence:

```suggestion
If the client received a final response with the `Upload-Complete: ?1` header field, the upload is complete and the corresponding response comes from the resource processing the representation according to the initial request ({{upload-complete}}). Note that the status code does not necessarily indicate success. `4xx (Client Error)` or `5xx (Server Error)` status codes indicate in this case an error occurred while processing the representation, and therefore, resuming the upload would not resolve this error.
```

Also, did you mean to say the _status code_ doesn't indicate success? I would think you meant the `Upload-Complete: ?1` field doesn't indicate success.

```suggestion
If the client received a final response with the `Upload-Complete: ?1` header field, the upload is complete and the corresponding response comes from the resource processing the representation according to the initial request ({{upload-complete}}). Note that this does not necessarily indicate success. `4xx (Client Error)` or `5xx (Server Error)` status codes indicate in this case an error occurred while processing the representation, and therefore, resuming the upload would not resolve this error.
```

Author: I didn't add `and` since `therefore` already broke the sentence apart

Reviewer 2: "Therefore" is an adverb (like "consequently"), not a conjunction (like "so"), so it cannot join sentences. You could also replace `therefore` with `so` if you want, assuming that complies with editorial guidelines (which it might not because I don't see that anywhere else). Or you could replace `, therefore` with `; therefore,` since semicolons can join sentences.

```suggestion
If the client received a final response with the `Upload-Complete: ?1` header field, the upload is complete and the corresponding response comes from the resource processing the representation according to the initial request ({{upload-complete}}). Note that this does not necessarily indicate success. `4xx (Client Error)` or `5xx (Server Error)` status codes indicate in this case an error occurred while processing the representation; therefore, resuming the upload would not resolve this error.
```

Reviewer: Thank you for the detailed comments on the grammar, Grant! Before a document is published, it goes through the RFC editors, who help us ensure that spelling and grammar are spotless and consistent in the end. This means we can focus on the technical details for now as these are the important pieces to move the document forward. Of course, we have to care enough about grammar to ensure the document remains readable :)

Reviewer 2: Ah, okay. In that case, I'll hold back on trivial spelling/grammar fixes until the end. Sorry for the clutter, and thanks for letting me know! Also let me know if I should have held back all these inconsistent phrasing reviews too. (Perhaps something should be added to the contributing guidelines about this?) As you can tell, this is the first RFC I've contributed to, so I appreciate any feedback you have on how I can make this process smoother. :)

Reviewer 2: Also, this review can be resolved now.

> If the client receives a 2xx successful final response with the `Upload-Complete: ?0` header field or the header field missing, the `Location` response header field points the client to the created upload resource. The client can continue appending representation data to it ({{upload-appending}}).

Reviewer 2: I think this would make it slightly more concise & clear.

```suggestion
If the client receives a 2xx successful final response with the `Upload-Complete` header field set to false or missing, the `Location` response header field points the client to the created upload resource. The client can continue appending representation data to it ({{upload-appending}}).
```

> If the client receives a non-successful final response with the `Upload-Complete: ?0` header field or the header field missing, or if it did not receive a final response, it can apply the heuristics described in {{retry}} to retry or resume the upload.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the client receives a non-successful final response with the `Upload-Complete` header field set to false or missing, or if it did not receive a final response, it can apply the heuristics described in {{retry}} to retry or resume the upload.
```

> If the client receives a non-successful final response with the `Upload-Complete: ?0` header field or the header field missing, or if it did not receive a final response, it can apply the heuristics described in {{retry}} to retry or resume the upload.

Reviewer 2: Clients should be able to obtain the upload resource location from a non-successful upload creation response too. In fact, the upload can't be retried or resumed without it. Can the semantics of some 4xx-5xx status codes (including any future ones) clash with something like this? I'm guessing not, since we do the same for 2xx.

```suggestion
If the client receives a non-successful final response with the `Upload-Complete: ?0` header field or the header field missing, or if it did not receive a final response, it can apply the heuristics described in {{retry}} to retry or resume the upload. If present, the `Location` response header field points the client to the created upload resource.
```

Author: Location means something different for 3xx responses so we can't always treat it as the upload resource URI. If upload creation fails, it's probably easier to just retry the entire upload. Let me think about this more regarding the retry section.

Reviewer 2: I expect some clients will try to do the entire upload in one upload creation request, using the `Location` from the 104 responses if there's a failure. I disagree that it's best to retry the entire upload, since that would defeat the purpose of this protocol in that circumstance. Clients that can handle 104 responses should be prepared to resume from upload creation failures.

But yes, I neglected 3xx because I was under the assumption this provision for "non-successful" retry heuristics was only applicable to 4xx-5xx. If 3xx is meant to be included by this, I think some phrasing would need to be rearranged.

Author: Yeah I was only thinking about empty upload creation requests. If a Location was delivered through 104 the upload can obviously be resumed. 2xx are successful status codes in RFC9110, we should make that more clear. 3xx definitely wouldn't work, and I don't know if Location has specific meanings on 4xx and 5xx responses defined in other specs.

Author: Let's discuss whether Location in 4xx/5xx can be used in a separate issue. Could potentially make it work if `Upload-Complete: ?0` is also present. Otherwise a new error response might define a different meaning for Location.

Representation metadata included in the initial request (see {{Section 8.3 of HTTP}}) can affect how servers act on the uploaded representation data. The `Content-Type` header field ({{Section 8.3 of HTTP}}) indicates the media type of the representation. The `Content-Encoding` header field ({{Section 8.4 of HTTP}}) names the content codings applied to the representation. The `Content-Disposition` header field ({{CONTENT-DISPOSITION}}) can be used to transmit a filename. For this purpose, the `inline` disposition type is RECOMMENDED.

If the client received a final response with the `Upload-Complete: ?1` header field, the upload is complete and the corresponding response comes from the resource processing the representation according to the initial request ({{upload-complete}}). Note that the status code does not necessary indicate success. `4xx (Client Error)` or `5xx (Server Error)` status codes indicate in this case an error occurred while processing the representation, therefore resuming the upload would not resolve this error.

> If the client receives a 2xx successful response that is not from the initial targeted resource, the `Location` response header field points the client to the created upload resource. The client can continue appending representation data to it ({{upload-appending}}).

Reviewer: > that is not from the initial targeted resource

How would the client check this? By looking for `Upload-Complete: ?0`?

Author: I updated the wording to match the other section "the `Upload-Complete: ?0` header field or the header field missing"

> If the client receives a non-successful response that is not from the initial targeted resource, it can apply heristics described in {{retry}} to retry or resume the upload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the client receives a non-successful response that is not from the initial targeted resource, it can apply heuristics described in {{retry}} to retry or resume the upload.
```

> If the client receives a non-successful response that is not from the initial targeted resource, it can apply heristics described in {{retry}} to retry or resume the upload.

Reviewer: The previous version also mentioned that the client should retry when it didn't receive any response (e.g. due to connection failure). Can we keep that?

If the client received a response with a

- `2xx (Successful)` status code, the client can continue appending representation data to it and/or mark the upload as complete ({{upload-appending}}).

> - `4xx (Client Error)` status code, the client SHOULD NOT attempt to retry or resume the upload, unless the semantics of the response allow or recommend the client to retry the request.

Reviewer 2: I was never fond of this phrasing and really think we shouldn't keep it for offset retrieval. Especially now that retry behavior is specified for other things, this could easily come off as it being unexpected for clients to implement retrying for 429 like they would for upload creation and upload appending. It gives a false sense of "they explicitly documented retry behavior for upload creation and upload appending, so if they didn't document any retry behavior for offset retrieval, it must not be important."

The same somewhat applies to upload cancellation, which currently says nothing at all about how clients should handle responses. But then again, it's not terribly important for upload cancellation to be retried if it fails, since the server will eventually expire the upload anyway, and the client is probably trying to quickly clean things up if it's canceling. But perhaps we should explicitly comment on that?

Reviewer: > I was never fond of this phrasing and really think we shouldn't keep it for offset retrieval. Especially now that retry behavior is specified for other things, this could easily come off as it being unexpected for clients to implement retrying for 429 like they would for upload creation and upload appending. It gives a false sense of "they explicitly documented retry behavior for upload creation and upload appending, so if they didn't document any retry behavior for offset retrieval, it must not be important."

I think that's interpreting a bit too much into this single sentence. Robust clients should handle certain 4XX responses gracefully by retrying them, giving uploads a greater chance to succeed. The current text allows and explicitly points out this behavior. So I believe it's fine to keep it as-is.

Retrying upload cancellation isn't relevant to making the upload succeed, so I don't see such conderations as much relevant for the purpose of this draft.

Reviewer 2: Fair enough, but I still don't see the point of the explicit recommendation against retrying as a base generality. I don't understand the value this recommendation is adding.

Author: It might be fine to leave this part out since it's not saying much about 4xx or 5xx other than you can do whatever you are already doing today. We could just describe the successful flow and let clients use their existing heuristics for errors.

Reviewer 2: That sounds reasonable.

Author: Made the change in 927da38beb85cdff9cafa2b2c4d06b26818ab81d

- MUST indicate the limits in the `Upload-Limit` header field ({{upload-limit}}), and
- SHOULD include the `Cache-Control` header field with the value `no-store` to prevent HTTP caching ({{CACHING}}).

> The resource SHOULD NOT generate a response with the `301 (Moved Permanently)`, `302 (Found)`, and `303 (See Other)` status codes because clients might follow the redirect without preserving the `HEAD` method.

Reviewer 2: Inconsistent phrasing:

```suggestion
The server SHOULD NOT generate a response with the `301 (Moved Permanently)`, `302 (Found)`, or `303 (See Other)` status codes because clients might follow the redirect without preserving the `HEAD` method.
```

- the request has content that is the end of the representation data. Once the content is fully processed by the server, the upload is complete.
- the request has no content. Once the request is processed by the server, the upload is complete. This usage requires the full representation data to have been processed during prior requests.

> If the client received a final response with the `Upload-Complete: ?1` header field, the upload is complete and the corresponding response comes from the resource processing the representation according to the initial request ({{upload-complete}}). Note that the status code does not necessary indicate success. `4xx (Client Error)` or `5xx (Server Error)` status codes indicate in this case an error occurred while processing the representation, therefore resuming the upload would not resolve this error.

Reviewer 2: (Same comments as https://github.com/httpwg/http-extensions/pull/3472#discussion_r3509801260.)

If the client received a final response with the `Upload-Complete: ?0` header field or the header field missing, the next step depends on the status code:
If the client received a final response with the `Upload-Complete: ?1` header field, the upload is complete and the corresponding response comes from the resource processing the representation according to the initial request ({{upload-complete}}). Note that the status code does not necessary indicate success. `4xx (Client Error)` or `5xx (Server Error)` status codes indicate in this case an error occurred while processing the representation, therefore resuming the upload would not resolve this error.

- A `2xx (Successful)` status code indicates that representation data was appended but the upload is not complete. The client can continue appending representation data.

> - For a `307 (Temporary Redirect)` or `308 (Permanent Redirect)` status code, the client MAY retry appending to the new URI.

Reviewer: Should the handling of 307 and 308 also be mentioned in the new retry section?

Author: They might not fit in the retry section since they are not failures, and we didn't mention it in the upload creation either. Should we split it off into a separate section? My current thinking is that we should ban 301/302/303 from the upload resource since they don't make sense for uploads, but also not requiring 307/308 to be supported by the client. The server can already "redirect" when creating the upload resource initially so I'm not sure if further redirects are useful.

Reviewer: > They might not fit in the retry section since they are not failures, and we didn't mention it in the upload creation either. Should we split it off into a separate section?

That makes sense. I think we had a dedicated section about redirects in the past, but it likely got removed as we put the response code handling in the client sections. But we can add it back.

> My current thinking is that we should ban 301/302/303 from the upload resource since they don't make sense for uploads

We already say this for offset retrieval responses (https://httpwg.org/http-extensions/draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload.html#section-4.3.2-3) and cancellation responses (https://httpwg.org/http-extensions/draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload.html#section-4.5.2-3). We can probably generalize this for responses without Upload-Complete: ?1 as well.

> but also not requiring 307/308 to be supported by the client. The server can already "redirect" when creating the upload resource initially so I'm not sure if further redirects are useful.

I agree. Clients can drop out from the upload at any point, so it doesn't make sense to require them to folloe redirects.

Author: Let me know what you think about the changes in bc91d5b

Reviewer: That works for me. The two sections I linked before don't mention 303, but your changes do. Does it make sense to add them to the existing paragraphs as well?

Author: Added

> If the client received a non-successful final response with the `Upload-Complete: ?0` header field or the header field missing, it can apply heristics described in {{retry}} to retry or resume the upload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the client received a non-successful final response with the `Upload-Complete: ?0` header field or the header field missing, it can apply heuristics described in {{retry}} to retry or resume the upload.
```

The server SHOULD terminate any in-flight requests to the upload resource before sending the response by abruptly terminating their HTTP connection(s) or stream(s) as described in {{concurrency}}.

> The server SHOULD NOT generate a response with the `301 (Moved Permanently)`, `302 (Found)`, and `303 (See Other)` status codes because clients might follow the redirect without preserving the `DELETE` method.

Reviewer 2: Inconsistent phrasing:

```suggestion
The server SHOULD NOT generate a response with the `301 (Moved Permanently)`, `302 (Found)`, or `303 (See Other)` status codes because clients might follow the redirect without preserving the `DELETE` method.
```

The `application/partial-upload` media type describes a contiguous block from the representation data that should be uploaded to a resource. There is no minimum block size and the block might be empty. The block can be a subset of the representation data, where the start and/or end of the block don't line up with the start and/or end of the representation data respectively.

### Retry {#retry}

If the client unexpectedly received a non-successful response with the `Upload-Complete` header field value of false or missing when creating the upload resource ({{upload-creation}}) or appending to it ({{upload-appending}}), it can apply the heuristics described below to retry or resume the upload.

> - `409 (Conflict)` with the `Upload-Complete` header field value of false can be resumed with the correct offset. If no `Upload-Offset` header field is provided, it SHOULD retrieve the offset ({{offset-retrieval}}).

Reviewer: My bad, I used the wrong section name in my suggestion, breaking the build.

```suggestion
- `409 (Conflict)` with the `Upload-Complete` header field value of false can be resumed with the correct offset. If no `Upload-Offset` header field is provided, it SHOULD retrieve the offset ({{offset-retrieving}}).
```

The `application/partial-upload` media type describes a contiguous block from the representation data that should be uploaded to a resource. There is no minimum block size and the block might be empty. The block can be a subset of the representation data, where the start and/or end of the block don't line up with the start and/or end of the representation data respectively.

> ### Retry {#retry}

Reviewer 2: Looks like Marius's suggestion (https://github.com/httpwg/http-extensions/pull/3472#discussion_r3507304143) wasn't applied properly. I'm guessing this should be a top-level heading?

```suggestion
# Retry {#retry}
```

Author: I originally added it to the wrong place. Moved it to below Concurrency as ##.

> If the client unexpectedly received a non-successful response with the `Upload-Complete` header field value of false or missing when creating the upload resource ({{upload-creation}}) or appending to it ({{upload-appending}}), it can apply the heuristics described below to retry or resume the upload.

Reviewer 2: I don't like using "unexpectedly" here, because the client should be prepared to handle this as an expected situation, even though the situation is unsuccessful. Also rephrased "value of" to "set to" to be consistent with similar phrasing elsewhere in the document.

```suggestion
If the client received a non-successful response with the `Upload-Complete` header field set to false or missing when creating the upload resource ({{upload-creation}}) or appending to it ({{upload-appending}}), it can apply the heuristics described below to retry or resume the upload.
```

> - `409 (Conflict)` with the `Upload-Complete` header field value of false can be resumed with the correct offset. If no `Upload-Offset` header field is provided, it SHOULD retrieve the offset ({{offset-retrieving}}).

Reviewer 2: I think this phrasing is clearer, specifying this recommendation only applies if trying to resume. That is the intent, right? Also, shouldn't we link the offset section here?

(And fixed the same inconsistency as https://github.com/httpwg/http-extensions/pull/3472#discussion_r3518276845.)

```suggestion
- `409 (Conflict)` with the `Upload-Complete` header field set to false can be resumed with the correct offset ({{upload-offset}}). If no `Upload-Offset` header field is provided, the client SHOULD retrieve the offset ({{offset-retrieving}}) before resuming.
```

> - `409 (Conflict)` with the `Upload-Complete` header field value of false can be resumed with the correct offset. If no `Upload-Offset` header field is provided, it SHOULD retrieve the offset ({{offset-retrieving}}).

Reviewer 2: Why do we specify "with the `Upload-Complete` header field value of false"? We treat `Upload-Complete` absent the same as false for other status codes.

Is this just to enable non-retriable, non-completing 409 responses? If so, this seems like a very strange semantic workaround for the concern I discussed in https://github.com/httpwg/http-extensions/pull/3472#issuecomment-4874362277. Servers shouldn't have to omit the `Upload-Complete` header in order to signal a non-retriable, non-completing 409 response. Servers shouldn't have to omit the `Upload-Complete` header _ever_ for upload creation & append responses.

Reviewer: > Why do we specify "with the `Upload-Complete` header field value of false"? We treat `Upload-Complete` absent the same as false for other status codes.

`Upload-Complete: ?0` means the 409 is coming from the resumable upload logic, not some intermediary. Resuming from a 409 that's returned by an intermediary will likely not succeed. That's different from 423 or 429 where adjusting the request is possible and has a good chance of succeeding.

Reviewer 2: That's reasonable for now. This likely wouldn't be needed if my earlier criticism of the underlying semantics were resolved, but that's to be addressed later. Feel free to resolve this review.

- `413 (Content Too Large)` can be resumed after applying appropriate limits.

> - `429 (Too Many Requests)` can be retried after appropriate delays.

Reviewer 2: I don't know that it's clear what "appropriate" means in "appropriate limits" and "appropriate delays". Is it possible to phrase these more concretely? It doesn't have to be specific on how to determine the limits/delays, just something less ambiguous and possibly confusing.

Reviewer: The section on upload limits already goes into more detail on how to handle 413 and we shouldn't repeat ourselves.

I think don't we have to add more text for 429, as a way to discover the appropriate delays is already mentioned in its RFC: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6585#autoid-4.

Reviewer 2: Oh, that reminds me, I really think the recommendations on how the client should behave when retrying for 413 should be moved from the limits section to the retry section. This section is where I'd expect to find that information, not the limits section. That would more than address my complaint about the ambiguity for 413. I expected that to be moved in this PR but forgot.

I'm not suggesting for 429 (and wasn't for 413, before I remembered the above) that we add more text to clarify what counts as appropriate. I was just suggesting we use different phrasing than "appropriate", because "appropriate" makes it sound like there's a single correct way to handle it the reader is expected to know about elsewhere. Though I guess that is kind of true for 429? I completely forgot about the `Retry-After` header. Would it be appropriate to reference that spec here? Either way, I suppose that does make my original complaint about 429's phrasing moot as well.

Reviewer: > Oh, that reminds me, I really think the recommendations on how the client should behave when retrying for 413 should be moved from the limits section to the retry section. This section is where I'd expect to find that information, not the limits section. That would more than address my complaint about the ambiguity for 413. I expected that to be moved in this PR but forgot.

I think we can move the paragraph https://httpwg.org/http-extensions/draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload.html#section-4.1.4-12 in the new retry section.

Author: I added a reference to upload-limit, but I think the paragraph has too many things specific to limits that might fit better in that section

Reviewer 2: That's better. I still would much prefer that information to be under the retry section directly, but this is acceptable.

- `5xx (Server Error)` status codes can be retried.

If no final response was received at all due to connectivity issues, the client MAY automatically attempt upload resumption by retrieving the current offset ({{offset-retrieving}}).

> The client should limit the number of retries it performs before considering the upload a failure.

Reviewer 2: Isn't this a normative statement? If not, it should be rephrased to avoid using the word "should".

```suggestion
The client SHOULD limit the number of retries it performs before considering the upload a failure.
```
